# Table of Contents:

This page is an example of automatic generation of table of content and references.

See the [source text file](toc.txt).


[TOC]

*Note*: This page is copy paste from
[Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Numerical_relativity) to show the
generation of table of content in this template.

The source code of this page is [here](toc.txt)
***

##Numerical Relativity

Numerical relativity is one of the branches of general relativity that uses
numerical methods and algorithms to solve and analyze problems. To this end,
supercomputers are often employed to study black holes, gravitational waves,
neutron stars and many other phenomena governed by Einstein's Theory of
General Relativity. A currently active field of research in numerical
relativity is the simulation of relativistic binaries and their associated
gravitational waves. Other branches are also active.

***

##Overview

A primary goal of numerical relativity is to study spacetimes whose exact form
is not known. The spacetimes so found computationally can either be fully
dynamical, stationary or static and may contain matter fields or vacuum. In
the case of stationary and static solutions, numerical methods may also be
used to study the stability of the equilibrium spacetimes. In the case of
dynamical spacetimes, the problem may be divided into the initial value
problem and the evolution, each requiring different methods.

Numerical relativity is applied to many areas, such as cosmological models,
critical phenomena, perturbed black holes and neutron stars, and the
coalescence of black holes and neutron stars, for example. In any of these
cases, Einstein's equations can be formulated in several ways that allow us to
evolve the dynamics. While Cauchy methods have received a majority of the
attention, characteristic and Regge calculus based methods have also been
used. All of these methods begin with a snapshot of the gravitational fields
on some hypersurface, the initial data, and evolve these data to neighboring
hypersurfaces.%%1%%

{1: <http://relativity.livingreviews.org/Articles/lrr-2000-5/>}

Like all problems in numerical analysis, careful attention is paid to the
stability and convergence of the numerical solutions. In this line, much
attention is paid to the gauge conditions, coordinates, and various
formulations of the Einstein equations and the effect they have on the ability
to produce accurate numerical solutions.

Numerical relativity research is distinct from work on classical field
theories as many techniques implemented in these areas are inapplicable in
relativity. Many facets are however shared with large scale problems in other
computational sciences like computational fluid dynamics, electromagnetics,
and solid mechanics. Numerical relativists often work with applied
mathematicians and draw insight from numerical analysis, scientific
computation, partial differential equations, and geometry among other
mathematical areas of specialization.

***

##History

###Foundations in theory


{2: [Einstein, Albert.](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albert_Einstein)
"Der Feldgleichungen der Gravitation" *Sitzungsberiche der Deutschen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, Klasse fur Mathematik, Physik, und Technik.*
} 

Albert Einstein published his theory of general relativity in 1915.%%2%% It,
like his earlier theory of special relativity, described space and time as a
unified spacetime subject to what are now known as the Einstein field
equations. These form a set of coupled nonlinear partial differential
equations (PDEs). In the nearly 100 years since the first publication of the
theory, relatively few closed-form solutions are known for the field
equations, and, of those, most are cosmological solutions that assume special
symmetry to reduce the complexity of the equations.


The field of numerical relativity emerged from the desire to construct and
study more general solutions to the field equations by approximately solving
the Einstein equations numerically. A necessary precursor to such attempts was
a decomposition of spacetime back into separated space and time. This was
first published by Richard Arnowitt, Stanley Deser, and Charles W. Misner in
the late 1950s in what has become known as the ADM formalism.[[3]](#3) Although for
technical reasons the precise equations formulated in the original ADM paper
are rarely used in numerical simulations, most or all practical approaches to
numerical relativity use a "3+1 decomposition" of spacetime into
three-dimensional space and one-dimensional time that is closely related to
the ADM formulation, because the ADM procedure reformulates the Einstein field
equations into a constrained initial value problem that can be addressed
encoded on a computer for solution.

At the time that ADM published their original paper, computer technology would
not have supported numerical solution to their equations on any problem of any
substantial size. The first documented attempt to solve the Einstein field
equations numerically appears to be Hahn and Lindquist in 1964,[4] followed
soon thereafter by Smarr[5][6] and by Eppley.[7] These early attempts were
focused on evolving Misner data in axisymmetry (also known as "2+1
dimensions"). At around the same time Tsvi Piran wrote the first code that
evolved a system with gravitational radiation using a cylindrical
symmetry.%%ref3%%
In this calculation Piran has set the foundation to many of the concepts used
today in evolving ADM equations, like "free evolution, Constrained evolution

###Early results
The first realistic calculations of rotating collapse were carried out in the
early eighties by Richard Stark and Tsvi Piran[9] in which the gravitational
wave forms resulting from formation of a rotating black hole were calculated
for the first time. For nearly 20 years following the initial results, there
were fairly few other published results in numerical relativity, probably due
to the lack of sufficiently powerful computers to address the problem. In the
late 1990s, the Binary Black Hole Grand Challenge Alliance successfully
simulated a head-on binary black hole collision. As a post-processing step the
group computed the event horizon for the spacetime. This result still required
imposing and exploiting axisymmetry in the calculations.[10]

{ref3:  Piran, T. (1978). "Cylindrical general relativistic collapse".
[*Phys. Rev. Lett.*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Physical_Review_Letters)
**41** (16): 1085.}

Some of the first documented attempts to solve the Einstein equations in three
dimensions were focused on a single Schwarzschild black hole, which is
described by a static and spherically symmetric solution to the Einstein field
equations. This provides an excellent test case in numerical relativity
because it does have a closed-form solution so that numerical results can be
compared to an exact solution, because it is static, and because it contains
one of the most numerically challenging features of relativity theory, a
physical singularity. One of the earliest groups to attempt to simulate this
solution was Anninos et al. in 1995.[11] In their paper they point out that

>Progress in three dimensional numerical relativity has been impeded in
>part by lack of computers with sufficient memory and computational power to
>perform well resolved calculations of 3D spacetimes.


### Maturation of the field

In the years that followed, not only did computers become more powerful, but
also various research groups developed alternate techniques to improve the
efficiency of the calculations. With respect to black hole simulations
specifically, two techniques were devised to avoid problems associated with
the existence of physical singularities in the solutions to the equations: (1)
Excision, and (2) the "puncture" method. In addition the Lazarus group
developed techniques for using early results from a short-lived simulation
solving the nonlinear ADM equations, in order to provide initial data for a
more stable code based on linearized equations derived from perturbation
theory. More generally, adaptive mesh refinement techniques, already used in
computational fluid dynamics were introduced to the field of numerical
relativity.

### 	Excision

In the excision technique, which was first proposed in the late 1990s,[12] a
portion of a spacetime inside of the event horizon surrounding the singularity
of a black hole is simply not evolved. In theory this should not affect the
solution to the equations outside of the event horizon because of the
principle of causality and properties of the event horizon (i.e. nothing
physical inside the black hole can influence any of the physics outside the
horizon). Thus if one simply does not solve the equations inside the horizon
one should still be able to obtain valid solutions outside. One "excises" the
interior by imposing ingoing boundary conditions on a boundary surrounding the
singularity but inside the horizon. While the implementation of excision has
been very successful, the technique has two minor problems. The first is that
one has to be careful about the coordinate conditions. While physical effects
cannot propagate from inside to outside, coordinate effects could. For example
if the coordinate conditions were elliptical, coordinate changes inside could
instantly propagate out through the horizon. This then means that one needs
hyperbolic type coordinate conditions with characteristic velocities less than
that of light for the propagation of coordinate effects (e.g., using harmonic
coordinates coordinate conditions). The second problem is that as the black
holes move, one must continually adjust the location of the excision region to
move with the black hole.

The excision technique was developed over several years including the
development of new gauge conditions that increased stability and work that
demonstrated the ability of the excision regions to move through the
computational grid.[13][14][15][16][17][18] The first stable, long-term
evolution of the orbit and merger of two black holes using this technique was
published in 2005.[19]

### Punctures
In the puncture method the solution is factored into an analytical part,[20]
which contains the singularity of the black hole, and a numerically
constructed part, which is then singularity free. This is a generalization of
the Brill-Lindquist [21] prescription for initial data of black holes at rest
and can be generalized to the Bowen-York[22] prescription for spinning and
moving black hole initial data. Until 2005, all published usage of the
puncture method required that the coordinate position of all punctures remain
fixed during the course of the simulation. Of course black holes in proximity
to each other will tend to move under the force of gravity, so the fact that
the coordinate position of the puncture remained fixed meant that the
coordinate systems themselves became "stretched" or "twisted," and this
typically lead to numerical instabilities at some stage of the simulation.

In 2005 researchers demonstrated for the first time the ability to allow
punctures to move through the coordinate system, thus eliminating some of the
earlier problems with the method. This allowed accurate long-term evolutions
of black holes.[23][24][25] By choosing appropriate coordinate conditions and
making crude analytic assumption about the fields near the singularity (since
no physical effects can propagate out of the black hole, the crudeness of the
approximations does not matter), numerical solutions could be obtained to the
problem of two black holes orbiting each other, as well as accurate
computation of gravitational radiation (ripples in spacetime) emitted by them.

***

## Recent developments
In the past few years, hundreds of research papers have been published leading
to a wide spectrum of mathematical relativity, gravitational wave, and
astrophysical results for the orbiting black hole problem. This technique
extended to astrophysical binary systems involving neutron stars and black
holes,[39] and multiple black holes.[40] One of the most surprising
predictions is that the merger of two black holes can give the remnant hole a
speed of up to 4000 km/s that can allow it to escape from any known
galaxy.[41][42] The simulations also predict an enormous release of
gravitational energy in this merger process, amounting to up to 8% of its
total rest mass.[43]

***

## See also

* [Mathematics of general relativity](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematics_of_general_relativity)
* [Post-Newtonian expansion](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Post-Newtonian_expansion)
* [Spin-flip](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spin-flip)
* [Cactus Framework](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cactus_Framework)


